# AZ-900 Azure Fundamentals

Adapted from [learn.microsoft] (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/certifications/azure-fundamentals/)

## What is Cloud Computing?

- Cloud computing is the delivery of computing services over the internet. Some of these computing services include
  - Virtual Machines (VMs)
  - Storage
  - Databases
  - Networking
  - IOT
  - Machine Learning(ML)
  - Artificial Intelligence(AI)

- The basic services provided by all cloud providers are compute power and storage
  - Computer power is how much processing that can be done by your computer
  - Storage is the volume of data that can be stored on your computer

## Describe the shared responsibility model

- Responsibilities that were traditionally shared between an organization and its IT department are now shared between the cloud provider and the consumer.  

- ie. There are some things that are the responsibility of the cloud provider such as:
  - Physical security
  - Power
  - Cooling
  - Network connectivity

- and some that are the responsibility of the consumer such as:
  - Data & information stored in the cloud
  - Access security
  - Devices used to/allowed to connect to your cloud

- There are some special situations however such as databases in the cloud which are the responsibility of the cloud provider to maintain, however, the data stored on there is the responsibility of the consumber. If the consumer deploys a vm and then installs a database on top of that, then they are responsible for that.

- The shared responsibility model is tied to the cloud service type selected by the consumer.  The service model will determine responsbility for:
  - OS
  - Network Controls
  - Applications
  - Identity and Infrastructure

## What are cloud models?

- Cloud models define the deployment type of cloud resources.
- There are three (3) main cloud models:

  - **Private Cloud** - Cloud delivering IT services for use by a single entity. Private clouds provide much greater control for the entity and its IT Department but at a greater financial cost with less of the benefits of the public cloud. Think of the resources that you access where you work such as your mapped drives etc.
  - **Public Cloud** - A public cloud is built, controlled and maintained by a third-party cloud provider.  Public cloud providers offer cloud access and resources for sale to the general public.
  - **Hybrid Cloud** - computing environment that uses both public and private clouds in an inter-connected environment.  It can be used in a scenario where there is an increased demand for temporary resources.  It can also be used to provide an extra layer of security.

| Public | Private | Hybrid |
| ------ | ------- | ------ |
| No capex to scale up | Orgs have complete control over resources & security | most flexibility |
|Quick provisioning/deprovisioning of apps | Data not collocated with other org's data | orgs determine where to run apps |
| Orgs pay for only what they use | Hardware must be purchased for startup and maintenance | Orgs control security, compliance or legal requirements |
| Orgs don't have complete control over resources and security | Orgs are responsible for HW maintenance and updates |
